DEP 0019 - Technical governance for the Django project (#107)
django/deps: accepted/0019-technical-governance-6x.rst

  person ineligible and that all members of the DSF Board 
  vote "yes" on a motion that the person in question is
  ineligible.

* A member of the Steering Council resigns from the Steering Council
  by notifying the other members of the Steering Council of their
  intent to resign.

The Steering Council should try to fill a vacancy on the Steering
Council. This may involve the departing member if they are eligible
and willing. The process is as follows:

* Any member of the Steering Council, including an otherwise
  eligible but departing member, may nominate a candidate to fill a
  vacancy.

* The Steering Council will notify the DSF Board, in
  writing, of the nomination. The DSF Board will check the
  qualifications of the person nominated, and the DSF Board
  will notify the Steering Council of the result. If the DSF
  Board determines the nominated person is not qualified, the
  nomination must be discarded.

* A qualified nominee will fill the vacancy if the Steering Council
  votes to appoint the nominee. As an exception to the Steering
  Council voting process described above, this vote must be completed

>   within one-week and it must be unanimous approval.

Reviewer: What happens in the case that one member is temporarily unavailable? For example they might be in hospital for that week.

Would we defer starting the vote until they are available?

Author: If we were facing that situation now (4 members trying to appoint a new person and one of the four is indisposed), that's what I would suggest. Unless there was something more urgent that required us to have the new person on board. If that was the case and this was getting in the way of us being productive of urgent matters, I'd likely push for tweaking the governance to not get in the way.

  a major release series and y is either 0, 1, or 2. For example,
  Django 3.1.0 is a Feature Release.

* "Bugfix Release" means an x.y.z release of Django, where z is not 0.
  For example, Django 3.1.4 is a Bugfix Release, while Django 3.1.0
  is a Feature Release.

* "Security Release" means a Bugfix Release which included a fix for a
  security issue in Django being handled under `Django's security
  process <https://www.djangoproject.com/security/>`_.

Specification
=============

How Django is developed
-----------------------

Everyone is encouraged to open tickets, triage tickets and perform code
reviews.

Commits can only be merged in by the `Mergers Team`_. A Merger can merge
their own commits if it's been reviewed by another Merger, the
`Triage & Review Team`_ or `Security Team`_. Members of the
`Releasers Team`_ can also merge commits when they are related to
releases.

A Minor Change that fails to reach consensus can be escalated to the
Steering Council for a final decision to merge.

How Django's technical direction is determined
----------------------------------------------

Everyone is encouraged to propose and provide feedback on new features

> for Django at any time on the `new-features GitHub repository`_.

Reviewer 2: I was wondering how this impacts discussions in the issue tracker and in the forums?

Previously, there has been an informal process where new features proposed on the issue tracker are often deferred for further discussion/feedback in the Forums.

Reviewer: We now have a formal process that new features proposed on Trac are redirected to [new-features](https://github.com/django/new-features) instead of the forum. It's been a big success - previously good ideas were getting lost on the forum. With GitHub issues, now have much better visibility of what the open discussions are.

Reviewer 2: Got it! I was unsure how the new proposal affects the existing patterns. Makes sense to say that it just replaces anything that previously existed 👍 

Will see how the discussions unfold on new-features. One concern could be if small tracks for detailed decisions in each issue on the new features need some more structure to work. But maybe that can be solved iteratively through the guidance provided in the issue templates.

Reviewer 2: GitHub is failing to mark this thread as resolved, but please consider it as resolved.

For features which qualify as a Major Change, proposers may be asked to
use `the DEP process`_. Likewise, other changes, for example to processes,
that do not fit the new features description may be presented as DEPs

If discussion of a Minor Change has failed to produce consensus, a
member may ask the Steering Council to make a decision.

Rejected discussions and features are eligible to be revisited at the
Steering Council's discretion.

How Django is released
----------------------

Only members of the `Releasers Team`_ may perform a release.

Django follows the time-based release schedule, as outlined in `DEP 44`_.

The `Security Team`_ may request a Security Release of Django. This
should be performed at or as close as is practicable to the time of
release requested by the `Security Team`_.

Steering Council role
---------------------

> The Steering Council provides oversight of Django's development and

Reviewer 3: A few lines above the release processes defined by DEP0044. If this isn't a conflict, which I presume, it might need clarification.

Author: Can you elaborate on the confusion please?

Reviewer 3: This was regarding the release process. I was under the impression that this is already formalized in DEP 44. However, further below, there are more examples of what this mains. I just didn't understand it at this point reading. I think this comment is resolved.

Author: Sounds good, thanks @codingjoe

release process, assists in setting the direction of feature
development and releases, selects Mergers and Releasers, and has a

> tie-breaking vote when other decision-making processes fail.

Reviewer 3: Hm… is that power limited to technical decisions? It seems odd that the steering committee would have the deciding vote on governance. I'd presume this power would be with the elected board.

Author: Please review my other comments. I think this one may be resolved since the SC is also elected.

Author: @codingjoe I'm going to mark this as resolved. Please let me know if you think it shouldn't be.

The Steering Council consists of five members.

The powers of the Steering Council are:

* To make a binding decision regarding any question of a technical
  change to Django.

> * To manage the Steering Council's membership via an election with the

Reviewer 3: In practice it might not make a big difference, but it's always good if a body with this much power doesn't self-elect members. If the governing body is appointed by the board, which is elected, you end up with a stronger legitimacy.

Author: To be clear, manage is referring to removing members or adding up to 2 replacement members if others step down. The Steering Council as a whole is elected by the DSF individual members, facilitated by the DSF board.

Author: @codingjoe I'm going to mark this as resolved. Please let me know if you think it shouldn't be.

  `DSF Board`_.

> * To create/update `teams`_

Reviewer 3: As I understand it, it also delegates powers and responsibilities to specialized teams, right?

Author: That's correct. I think part of creating/updating a team should imply potential delegation of responsibilities.

Steering Council's goals
++++++++++++++++++++++++

> The Council's goal is twofold - to safeguard big decisions that affect

Reviewer 3: emdash 🤖 
```suggestion
The Council's goal is twofold — to safeguard big decisions that affect
```

Author: FYI, this language is taken directly from [DEP 12](github.com/django/deps/blob/main/final/0012-steering-council.rst#:~:text=twofold).

Reviewer 3: Thanks. I hope I am not making too much trouble. Please disregard my comments if they don't advance the purpose of this change.

Author: I'm going to mark this as resolved. If there's no difference between the suggestion and the existing language, I'd like to reuse the existing language.

Django projects at a fundamental level, and to help shepherd the
project's future direction.

> While the Council should not define this direction entirely by itself,

Reviewer 3: The “should not” phrase is relatively vague. My understanding is that most decisions are not self- but community-initiated.

IMHO, it may be a fairly good practice to separate those two powers.

Author: > The “should not” phrase is relatively vague. My understanding is that most decisions are not self- but community-initiated.

The subsequent sentences in this paragraph outline specific actions the Steering Council can take to help encourage and support community driven ideas. I feel like that should help dispel the vagueness for a reader.

> it may be a fairly good practice to separate those two powers.

Can you clarify which two powers you're referring to here please?

Author: @codingjoe I'm circling back on things. Are there specific changes you're wanting to see here yet?

it should be the catalyst within the community for doing so - as such,
it is expected for Council members to actively participate in engaging
with the community, canvassing for ideas about big new features or
directions to take the framework, and reporting back to the community
and the DSF Board on these ideas and if the Council believes they
should be followed.

Decision making process of the Steering Council
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

When asked to make a technical decision, the Steering Council should
first discuss this amongst themselves. If there's agreement on a course
of action, a single member will respond on the `Django Forum`_, ticket, or
`new-features GitHub repository`_ on behalf of the Steering Council. It

> may optionally include a dissenting opinion if someone wishes to include one.

Reviewer 4: This paragraph defines how to handle and publish decisions of the Steering Council, but not how to make them. It essentially assumes rough consensus (within the council) on any issue.

Reviewer 5: > but not how to make them

Yes, this is deliberate. The specification of the voting mechanism is DEP 10 was as good a demonstration as we could hope for of why specifying such a thing (especially for a small organisation like ourselves) is too heavy an approach. 

For me (personally) _rough consensus_ is exactly what we should be aiming for. A loose show of hands is one thing, but (for me) a formal vote marks a failure. (That we resorted to something so crude, even between just the five of us, is a lack of… something… I would argue.) 

**But** equally, other SCs in the future can make their own decisions. Simple majority, super majority, unanimous, are all reasonable options to follow: it very much should be up to each SC to decide how they want to proceed.

The point with a _dissenting opinon_ is exactly to give voice in any circumstance where (effectively) _unanimous_ didn't carry the day. 

In reality, despite often starting a discussion from quite different positions, we've not had a case where this has been necessary. Legislating for it (too heavily) is precisely what we're aiming to avoid with this new document. 

(We can clarify here, if needed, sure)

Reviewer 4: This is a laudable position -- a model to follow, even -- but I think the wording that hides it behind the missing "else" of "if there's agreement" is suboptimal.

```suggestion
When asked to make a technical decision, the Steering Council should
first discuss this amongst themselves. It is up to each Steering Council
to decide how to resolve disagreements. When there's a decision on a course
of action, a single member will respond on the `Django Forum`_, ticket, or
`new-features GitHub repository`_ on behalf of the Steering Council. It
may optionally include a dissenting opinion if someone wishes to include one.
```

One thing to consider around this is transparency -- the legislated voting system did, to a degree, give us that. When I go voting for the next SC, and some existing members are running again, I want to have some info about how they functioned within the SC. On the other hand, there is value in keeping internal discussions private -- that usually makes it easier for people to both express opinions and change them. I don't have a concrete suggestion how to solve this tension, but I thought it worth bringing it up.

Reviewer 5: > One thing to consider around this is transparency ...

Sure, and transparency is important, and something we've tried to promote via [publishing our regular meeting notes](https://github.com/django/steering-council), actively engaging on topics that come up in the Forum and new-features repo, and publishing the more occasional [Update](https://www.djangoproject.com/weblog/2026/feb/11/steering-council-2025-year-in-review/)™. 

That goal is hopefully addressed by the `Steering Council reports` section of this document. (To which clarifications are of course welcome.)

A separate thing is whether SC deliberations (rather than decisions) should be public, and/or constrained to a specific format. On both of those, I'd lean to a hard no (for the reasons given). 

How do we judge an SC's performance? Well, what got done during their term? Did they achieve what they set out to? Did they do what they said they would? Or at least try? 

One big change is that ≈ DEP 10 conceived of the SC as ≈ only there for tie-breaks, whereas it became evident that the SC needs to play a more active role than that. In which case, I think (both) that if an individual SC member is sat doing nothing, that would be pretty evident in a community like ours, and that public formal votes wouldn't help that. (Indeed, the latter would likely give an appearance of activity where none really exists.) 

Or, my thoughts are along those kind of lines. It's not the _How decisions are made_ bit that's the key locus there. 🤷‍♂️ 

(No problem with the suggested edit here!)

Reviewer 4: | It's not the _How decisions are made_ bit that's the key locus there. 🤷‍♂️

Well, the title of this section is "Decision making process of the Steering Council"... 

| How do we judge an SC's performance? ...

That's not my question, though. I expect Steering Council members to have personal agendas, sometimes-strong opinions about the directions the project should evolve in, and I don't really expect those to be fully expressed in their public declarations (they might express them on the forum and in PR reviews, but it's very easy to miss such posts). Say I like "enterprise" features, and a specific SC member keeps convincing others to approve such features -- will I know to vote for them next time?

If the existing posts had, for every decision taken, a "Initial positions / arguments / final positions" summary, that would probably give all the info I want, but I'm well aware of the load this would put on whoever is doing the current meeting notes (and maybe even on the discussions themselves), so I don't think requiring that is a good idea.

As I said, I don't have concrete suggestions to make this better. There seems to be a trade-off here, and as such, the point selected along it is fine. I just wanted the point discussed in case someone does come up with an improvement.

Author: @shaib While you didn't ask this directly, when considering folks for re-election, you can look at what the team has accomplished, then dig into those to see how those accomplishments came together.

And for what it's worth, this SC has commented on various topics with their views before the team makes a decision. Though that doesn't make it easy to find when the next election cycle comes up.

Author: Marking this as resolved to match the decision to leave this as is.

Steering Council eligibility
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To be eligible to be on the steering council, a person must do the following:

* Be a DSF Individual member.

* Shared any of their corporate affiliations.

> * Have three or more Steering Council Qualities.

Reviewer 3: That seems highly subjective. As much as I believe agreeing on a common set of values is helpful, they make for weak selection criteria, which in turn takes legitimacy from the selection process and opens it to subjective criticism.

Author: @codingjoe I feel like you may have a misunderstanding on how the process works based on a few of your comments. I'm going to explain a bit more in this comment, but I apologize if I'm over explaining. The Steering Council is elected by the DSF individual members. The candidates who are able to stand for election are limited by these traits which will be evaluated by the DSF board. People are able to vote for whoever they want.

Over the last few years, we've made consistent efforts to broaden the candidates for the Steering Council. By expressing traits, we're hoping people identify with several of them and realize that they are qualified to self-nominate themselves. The goal here is to be more accessible to candidates who haven't seem themselves as eligible in the past.

Reviewer 3: @tim-schilling no worries, I wrote my comments as a complete newcomer to the DSF governance. So you can't overexplain anything :) My aim was to provide a fresh set of eyes and I appreciate your long explanation.

Back to the topic: I see, that's a great effort. But seeing how I was looking at this from the outside in and confused it, maybe this can be phrased under the pretense of inclusion. This particular sentence makes it seem more exclusive to me. Not a native speaker though.

Author: > ... I was looking at this from the outside in and confused it, maybe this can be phrased under the pretense of inclusion. This particular sentence makes it seem more exclusive to me.

Do you have a suggestion on how to reword this? I'm not sure how to define a requirement as inclusive. By its definition it is gatekeeping.

Author: @codingjoe I'm going to resolve this conversation.

Indicators:

* Multi-year Django user

* Multi-year Django community contributor

Forward thinking
****************

We want people who have a vision for Django that extends years into the
future. The Steering Council needs to plan and execute on long-term
strategies for Django.

Indicators:

* Participated with one or several DEPs

* Participated in a related working group or team, conference, organization

* Created content or participated in discussions on the topic

Stewardship
***********

We want people who understand Django's value of robustness and consistency.
The Steering Council needs to make decisions that keep Django reliable and
trusted.

Indicators:

* Participated with one or several DEPs

* Participated in a related working group or team, conference, organization

* Created content or participated in discussions on the topic

Django usage expertise
**********************

We want people who know how Django is used to build real-world applications.
The Steering Council needs to understand the needs of web applications and
experience with actual usage allows that.

Indicators:

* Experience building and maintaining production Django apps over years

> * Has a network of people who maintain and build Django applications

Reviewer 4: I find this unclear, or maybe just too abstract.

Author: Let me provide some context and see if we can arrive at a better way to phrase this. If a person has been building python apps for a while, but not always Django applications, they likely have a decent amount of knowledge of Django applications. If that person also has a group of people they can rely on for questions about Django or how to build things, that means their accessible knowledge about Django is more than what they know themselves. They would be able to survey their network to ask for opinions or understand a different concept more readily.

We wanted to capture that distinction because many people will just think about what do they themselves know rather than, who is in my direct circle that I could talk to to understand this? That latter has a lot of benefit at the Steering Council level because the surface area is so large.

Let me know where there's confusion and/or how we can reduce that concept into a short sentence.

Maybe: 

> Has a network of Django practitioners and builders they can consult to access perspectives and expertise beyond their own

Author: @shaib I'm circling back on things. Can you let me know if the above clarification helps please?

Reviewer 4: @tim-schilling sorry -- I had marked this as still requiring attention, but then lost track of it.

The clarification doesn't help, and it's my fault, for being, eh, too abstract...

The problem I see is that the list of traits and indicators is given as a way to judge eligibility of candidates, but that has two different perspectives:
- As a potential candidate, am I eligible?
- As a voter looking at a candidate, are they eligible?

All the other indicators (I've just gone through the list to verify again) are based on work which usually leaves visible evidence, and so, are easy for a candidate to claim and a voter to verify. This one, not so much. 

The explanation in your message clarifies that, indeed, when drafting this indicator, you had the "am I eligible" angle in mind; but the other one is missing.

I'm pointing out, just for completeness, that the list of Qualities, in its own presentation, is listed as "beneficial", and "if you feel you possess that trait [...] that is sufficient" -- i.e. mostly for self-assessment; but having three qualities is listed before as an eligibility criterion on the same level as the objective "Be a DSF Individual member" and "Not a DSF Board member".

So, basically, I feel a tension between the apparent subjectivity of this indicator, and the objective role that I thought indicators should fulfill (in addition to a subjective role).

Author: I think I understand. You're raising the concern that a person could claim this trait, but the general public wouldn't be able to tell. If I'm understanding you properly, I do agree there's a tension there. Though I think we need to tolerate it until we have a good reason not to.

I suspect you're coming at this from the angle of "how do I as a voter know if a person meets the criteria?", I'd point out, it's the candidate's responsibility to explain that in their nomination statement (and to the DSF board when nominating themselves). If they don't communicate their utility to the community, there's not much that you as the a voter can do to help them.

Author: Hi @shaib, the SC discussed this and landed on keeping this as is. I appreciate you highlighting the difference in subjectivity for this indicator. Given that the indicators are an incomplete set of examples of a way a person could show they have a quality, we're inclined to keep it. I'm going to mark the conversation as resolved, but you're welcome to follow-up with additional questions.

Reviewer 4: Hi @tim-schilling , thanks for your (and the SC's) understanding and consideration.

   the Steering Council, or who it believes are registering in bad
   faith.

3. Registration of candidates will close two weeks after it has
   opened. After registration of candidates closes, the DSF Board will
   publish the roster of candidates to the Django Forum and any other
   appropriate venues, and the election will begin. The DSF Board will
   provide a voting form accessible to registered voters.

4. The voting system is selected by the DSF Board. Voting will be by secret
   ballot. Each voter will be presented with a ballot containing the roster
   of candidates, and any relevant materials regarding the candidates, in a
   randomized order.

5. The election will conclude three weeks after it begins. The DSF Board will
   tally the votes and produce a summary. This summary will be ratified by a
   majority vote of the DSF Board, then posted by the DSF Board to the Django
   Forum and any other appropriate venues. The five candidates with the
   highest vote totals will immediately become the new Steering Council.

Removing a single Steering Council member
*****************************************

A member of the Steering Council can be removed in the following
ways:

> * They become ineligible due to actions of the Code of Conduct

Reviewer 3: The CoC currently has a working group, which otherwise isn't mentioned here. Which might be important if they can dismiss a member.

Author: committee == working group in this sense. We can revise the language to be consistent. Suggestion here: https://github.com/django/deps/pull/107/files#r3110813593

Author: I believe this has been resolved in the wording changes.

statement of no-confidence in the Steering Council by identifying a
material breach of their duties as defined in the technical governance.
Upon seconding by another individual member of the DSF the DSF Board
will evaluate the merits of the statement of no-confidence in their
next meeting.

If the statement is found to be accurate and correct the DSF Board shall
inform the Steering Council of the breach and provide 2 weeks to
rectify said breach. If the Steering Council fails to rectify the
breach in the time allotted, a new Steering Council election will be
triggered. Current members of the Steering Council may run in the new
election.

Steering Council reports
++++++++++++++++++++++++

The Steering Council should produce reports of its actions and the state
of Django. To facilitate the standing goal of transparency, as appropriate,
and at their discretion the Steering Council may publish additional posts to
help communicate progress.

* The Steering Council's meeting minutes can be found in the
  `steering-council GitHub repository`_.

* The `Django features roadmap`_ for can be found in the
  `new-features GitHub repository`_

> Teams

Reviewer 3: They are everywhere else referred to as working groups. Sticking to one term might simplify comprehension of DSF governance.

Author: I recognize that's an oddity, but it seems small and reasonable to deal with for the time being.

* Allowing the Steering Council to revisit rejected discussions at
  their discretion.

* Not allowing Board members to serve on the Steering Council.

* Removing the explicit voting from the decision making of the Steering
  Council.

* Using a collection of qualities Steering Council candidates rather than
  specific eligibility prerequisites.

* Allowing the DSF Board greater autonomy in running the Steering Council
  elections.

Rationale
=========

Similar to DEP 12, this is another iteration on our governance. While
this is a significant change in terms of content, the spirit and intent
of Django's technical governance remains the same. All governance
requires periodic cultivation, and this should be seen as one of those
instances.

Regarding specific changes:

* Presenting a merged governance document avoiding overruling
  governance documents (DEP 10 & 12).

  * A single document avoids having to read two documents to
    understand the governance.

* Reducing the number of sections and topics.

  * DEP 10 sought to provide information on how the new governance
    would operate. While helpful in that moment, it eventually

>     became a burden when revisiting the document.

Reviewer 4: These together suggest that we should differentiate between documents which are literal DEPs -- documents describing the suggested change -- and documents describing the "achieved state", a "constitution" of sorts.

DEP 12, in particular, was mostly a change document. This one appears to be more of a result document.

Author: Yes, exactly. This is a replacement of DEP 10 and 12 so a person wouldn't have to sort out which pieces are being overridden.

I believe you're pointing out, what do we do in the future when we need to change this again and that's a good question. Maybe we pull this into the Django code base so there's a source of truth somewhere and then allow the DEPs to be change documents for governance.

We could also host it on the djangoproject.com/foundation/ section of the website so it doesn't need to impact the codebase.

    becomes relevant right when an election is starting.

* Allowing the Steering Council to revisit rejected discussions at
  their discretion.

  * This prevents one Steering Council from limiting the next
    Steering Council in an undesirable fashion. If a community
    member is asking for discussions to be revisited frequently, to
    the extent of being annoying, that would be a Django Code of
    Conduct Violation.

  * This language was changed from vetoed to rejected to better match
    the decision making process for the Steering Council.

* Not allowing Board members to serve on the Steering Council.

  * This simplifies some of the governance by reducing exception cases.
    Plus, these roles are meant to be time-intensive and it's unlikely
    for someone to do both well.

* Removing the explicit voting from the decision making of the Steering
  Council.

  * This accurately reflects the process the 6.X Steering Council has
    been using. Future Steering Councils may internally decide to use
    voting, however it is not a necessary process. The discussion and
    deliberation is a more accurate representation of how the Django

>     community arrives at consensus.

Reviewer 4: But this is not about how the Django Community makes decisions, it's about the Steering Council specifically; and at least in some cases, the Council's role is to decide when a decision needs to be made and consensus cannot be achieved.

I think that whenever a decision is made without consensus, it is preferable to have transparency (of course, consensus is inherently transparent).

Reviewer 4: Let's keep this discussion in one place, where the decision process is defined.
